so New Year's resolutions around the
corner I think 9% of resolutions stick
what advice have you got for me okay so
let's say I wanted to lose weight the
first thing is realizing that all of our
lives are about habits not goals the
second aspect of this is one of the most
effective strategies to brainwash
yourself to form these new habits and
that is Chase Hughes is a former
military veteran turned world-renowned
expert in behavioral analysis and human
influence he has trained Secret Service
agents Navy SEAL leaders CEOs and
government officials to master
communication behavioral detection and
persuasion you can look at three factors
every single time to determine why
someone was successful or why they
failed the first is self-mastery where
we look at confidence body language
discipline and authority and we know
that people are hyper responsive to
Authority but how do we establish
Authority ourselves Authority is made up
of five things and that's number two is
their level of observation and there's
five C's that we talk about in Behavior
profiling should we get into but my
favorite example and one of the fastest
ways to get a read on another human
being is how often they're BL bling if I
start seeing an increase in someone's
blink rate I know I need to change the
subject right away interesting and the
third their level of communication and
if you want to learn how to start a
conversation or continue one this is for
you it comes down to understanding the
type of person that you are in front of
now segregate people into six groups and
that'll influence the best way to talk
to those people so we can get into if
you want please okay number one what
about how to win an argument what are
the things I should definitely not do so
the big mistake most people make is
don't do that
this has always blown my mind a little
bit 53% of you that listen to the show
regularly haven't yet subscribe to the
show so could I ask you for a favor
before we start if you like the show and
you like what we do here and you want to
support us the free simple way that you
can do just that is by hitting the
Subscribe button and my commitment to
you is if you do that then I'll do
everything in my power me and my team to
make sure that this show is better for
you every single week we'll listen to
your feedback we'll find the guest that
you want me to speak to and we'll
continue to do what we do thank you so
much Chase Hughes who are you and what
is your mission I'm a behavior guy
Behavior expert and
I think I've just set out to teach
people that there is an entire world
that other people can't really see don't
have access to and I think for the last
10,000 years of recorded history you can
look at any event or any leader of any
country and everything that dictates the
outcomes of situations comes down to
human factors every time no matter if
there's economic turmoil there's people
getting pissed off about an economy
there's AI or technology innovations
that are happening it everything comes
down to human interactions and whether
or not you can manage yourself you're a
good leader who the good leaders are and
who can persuade the people to feel a
certain way and who'd you do it for I
think I'd do it for people that have
gone through a period in their life
realizing that there's an invisible
advantage that some other people have
the people that got
successful maybe have some kind of
advantage that they're not able to to
tangibly see and I think showing them
that this is one of the biggest lovers
that you could ever pull in your life is
the most rewarding and fascinating thing
to see someone go through this
transition to realize that this human
behavior stuff dictates outcomes in life
when you say this you're referring to
human behavior and is human behavior is
it like a set of tactics is it like a
form of psychology what is what is this
when you say the word this when I say
human behavior I mean that when a person
becomes successful or they become a
failure you can look at three factors
every single time to determine why
someone was successful or why they
failed that is their level of
self-mastery their level of observation
like can they read the room can they
read the person that they're actually
talking to and their level of
communication can they speak
influentially can they talk
about outcomes in a way that inspire
people and motivate people and can they
communicate in a persuasive way that
moves people and who exactly have you
worked with lots of government agencies
uh notably I've worked with intelligence
agencies I've worked with the
psychological operations Department the
US Army which is the Special Operations
Command I've trained a lot of the US
Navy leaders nowadays
and a lot of civilians are my main base
of clients right now what do
intelligence what do you do for
intelligence agents so when we talk to
intelligence agents the number one thing
that we train them in is recognizing
human behavior and we also teach
interrogation and we tend to teach like
if I'm doing an interrogation it's kind
of the same as if I'm uh an intelligence
officer somewhere trying to talk
somebody into spying on their own
country for us both of those things are
about talking someone into doing
something that's not really in their
best interest so when it comes down to
that that's really where
we get to the point the rubber meets the
road can you talk someone into doing
something that they a normally wouldn't
do which is maybe sales because they
normally they wouldn't have otherwise
done that or B in the interrogation
world can I talk you into something that
you wouldn't want to do because it's not
your best interest like confessing to a
crime or providing intelligence or
something like that and that's where we
really do a lot of the training for
police and government next to me there's
this massive book called The behavior
Ops manual it's probably the biggest
book I've ever seen um what is the
wealth of experience that have fed into
this body of work that book right there
is my entire life so probably 30 to
40,000 hours of of research on this
stuff every technique that I've ever
learned or taught every method that
we've ever used for interrogations or
persuasion or influence all that stuff
is inside of the behavior Ops manual and
I wrote that book and we can get into
that if you want to right now I received
a brain diagnosis where I thought I was
going to lose my brain and I was
desperate I'm just wondering how's my
family going to feed itself so I wanted
to put every single piece of knowledge
that I've ever created or I've ever come
up with for any government agent
everything all on the table and that's
what this book was it's just the
culmination of everything and you served
in the military yourself I did for 20
years what is the
most common thing that people come to
your work for like if you were to
encapsulate it into like a sentence what
they're searching for in their own
personal lives it would be a person
that is lacking some degree of control
in some aspect of their
life and it's typically they think they
need skills most of my clients come to
me saying I want the technique I want
the skill teach me the the recipe to do
X Y and Z what do I say on the phone
give me a new sales script so I have
this model called the acss model that I
trained to my entire staff and that acss
model stands for Authority
Comfort social skills and then
skills 90% of people say they need more
skills but what they need is Authority
or comfort and they can't be comfortable
in a
conversation so I could give you like I
would talk to these clients and I would
say I could spend $10 million write the
best persuasion script for whatever your
ideal outcome is hand you this thing on
a silver platter and if you're not
comfortable in that conversation you're
not going to be successful so I could
give it to somebody with social anxiety
and have them go read this out loud it's
not Harry Potter we're not reading
spells it's not a spell so a lot of
people's problems come from Comfort a
lack of being able to be comfortable in
in a conversation and the level of
authority that they might have and I
don't mean hierarchical Authority I just
mean personal Authority but they don't
know it they think it's I need more
social skills I need to learn small talk
or I need this little technique so every
time the one thing I tell every client
is if I give you a flight checklist
right now for a a small plane Cessna
172 are you a pilot no having this
little checklist of what to do does not
give you the skill so a lot of that so
much of that comes from comfort and the
problem that a lot of people have is
they're competing with other people on
height on looks on social status money
hierarchy confidence all this other
stuff the number one thing you need to
compare yourself with other people on is
Comfort that's it is can I be more
comfortable than the other person in in
this conversation because our brains are
naturally wired to compete we can't turn
competition off but we can change what
they're focused on and if they're
focused on Comfort we win a lot more
conversations Comfort yeah how does that
manifest is that just like being like
physically comfortable what is that yeah
it would be physical comfort so one of
the challenges I give to people is for
your first week all the only thing I
want you to focus on I'm not going to
give you the this long list to go look
into your phone and have to read it
before every meeting the one thing I
want you to focus on this week is can
you move
slower than the other people in the room
that's it just adjusting the speed limit
on your body so if you were standing in
a swimming pool how fast would your arms
and legs move if you were underwater and
make that the speed limit for this
entire week that's all I want you to
focus on and that makes so many changes
in people's mind because we change our
bodies and we change how our emotions
are feeling and there's one thing that
fear does it speeds our body up so if
you see someone doing these rapid jerky
movements you're you're seeing mostly
fear or stress in their
body so get more comfortable in an
interaction conversation even if it's on
the phone or in
person yeah so on the phone it would be
speaking at a normal composed Pace okay
and then so step two is composure can I
get you into a place where you have some
composure and the left and right side of
composure we have collapse and we have
posturing so we I have a person that
makes themselves small so other people
can be comfortable or I make myself big
so other people can get away from me and
we have we see that with every aspect of
our lives like when I first started my
business or when I first got out of the
military these people called me for a
keynote so this guy calls me and he's
like what's your hourly rate and I said
6K uh and I said that's including travel
and all that and the only thing he did
he didn't say anything on the phone he
just
goes that's it he just made that noise
and right away I said oh yeah but we
could do a discount I could probably do
like 5K we could even take some off 50%
I could even take 75% since you're here
here and I have to do this it just made
up excuses and I almost got to the point
where I was like let me pay you I'll
give you some money if you come let me
speak on stage for you
and that's collapse so that's I'm in
collapse in some areas of my life I
might posture in some areas of my life
and our goal is to get out of that swing
but the problem most people have if I'm
living in collapse the solution looks
like
posturing and we see this in like guys
that learn pickup like I'm going to
learn how to posture because it's the
opposite of what I'm doing it's not the
center where I need to be and what is
the center that's that's composure that
would be composure and I would say
composure is a combination of the things
that make up authority and authority is
made up of five things and that's
confidence discipline leadership
gratitude and enjoyment so I have an
Authority inventory this is day one the
first thing that I give to intelligence
people or I've got a guy that owns a car
dealership whoever the client is and
it's the authority assessment it
assesses you on those things and
wherever your lowest point is that's
what's keeping you from being successful
in most conversations when you need to
persuade somebody and it pinpoints it
very quickly and if I could go into this
a little further um the way that we live
our lives off camera I'm sure you would
agree you just had Vanessa van Edwards
on uh it it bleeds out in our body
language it bleeds out in not just body
language but how we breathe how we talk
how we come across so even if I read
that article on LinkedIn of 19 ways to
look more confident and it says well
have better posture sit up straighter
shake hands make better eye contact I
did all of that and I look really
presentable but back home I've got a 8ot
pile of laundry sitting in the bedroom
my bed's nasty I've got dishes all piled
up in the sink there's a part of our
brain that's somehow dedicated to
reminding us I'm faking it right now and
that comes across so whether we're doing
it consciously or uncons consciously
we're manufacturing gut feelings in
other
people so our job is to manufacture
better gut feelings and the five most
common ways that those bleed out in our
everyday life is how we manage five
areas of our life and that is our
environment like do I take care of my
environment my uh time
appearance my social life and my
financial life because those are the
those are the five things we worry about
in the back of our head that start
bleeding out these gut feelings because
we've all had a conversation where
everything on the surface looked great
but afterwards we were like something
was off I don't know what it was but
something just didn't feel right about
that guy and we've all had that little
experience
and getting a hold of your those five
qualities that make up Authority are the
fastest way to get success in your life
and just drastically start changing your
life so it's really that the
controllable element it's our
environment our time our appearance our
social life and our finances that's the
like controllable Foundation to all
these other things um that we talked
about yeah so that would be the the
bottom Foundation of that little pyramid
and the far left side of that triangle
would be confidence discipline
leadership gratitude and enjoyment yeah
and those elements alone produce
feelings in other people that make them
see an authority figure and you've heard
of the milgrim
experiment oh gosh it reminds me of
something I read when I was 16 in
Psychology class in a textbook probably
did that was the one where they got
people to shock each other yeah please
explain all right let me give you a
quick recap it's Yale University I think
it's
1962 and Yale runs an ad in the paper
says come help us with this study on
learning and we'll give you 20 bucks or
lunch voucher or something like that so
all these volunteers come out and
there's a tall guy in a lab coat and a
official clipboard there and there's one
other volunteer and you draw straws one
of you is the teacher one of you is the
learner so you're led into this room you
watch this learner guy get strapped up
he's on this table getting strapped up
to this electric shock machine and every
time he gets a question on this quiz
wrong you've got to shock him you have
to hit the button and every Progressive
question you increase the voltage on
this machine that goes all the way up on
the far right to xXx danger severe shock
is what it says on
there but the whole time you're shocking
him the you can hear the guy screaming
on the other side of the wall he's
screaming and Midway through the process
the guy's banging on the wall he's like
I have a heart condition I don't want to
do this anymore I'm out I quit I don't
want to do the experiment and 90% of
these people will turn around to the guy
in the lab coat and the guy in the lab
coat is like please continue it's
important that you continue the
experiment so they keep going and going
and almost to the end no more
response it's just silence the guy
doesn't even respond to questions and
the guy in the lab coat says any
non-answer has to be
treated as if it were an incorrect
answer please continue and they keep
going and going and going and you you
can watch some some of these are on
video and you just watch this their
faces toward the
end these psychiatrists at the beginning
of this predicted less than 1% would go
all the
way 67% of people will go all the way
and 250 volts is enough to kill you 100%
went up to 250 the presence of novelty
and Authority did
everything it made a person commit
murder and that's I would say I would
argue that's more difficult than selling
someone a
car and that Authority comes in that
particular example came from going to
the university the lab coat Etc but how
do we establish Authority ourselves is
it going back to the things you said
there about environment appearance Etc
finances yeah is there like are are
there physical expressions of that
Authority in a day-to-day basis there
are slowness of movement is one of the
most common so we have slowness of
movement so the right side of that
Authority triangle has five letters on
it and that stands for movement
appearance confidence connection and
intent is our intent visible that
outward sign of authority is what a lot
of people tend to look for
what does Authority look like but what
we're really doing is I want to look up
the symptoms of authority not the cause
because we all these LinkedIn articles
YouTube videos that are saying how to
have more confidence how to do x y and z
are how to have the symptoms instead of
the cause of authority so people with
authority tend to sit up straight but
they don't sit up straight because they
read an article they sit up straight
because they see the world a certain way
and that's so much of a difference
between changing my world view versus
changing my posture that's very
different outcomes and we're still
generating those gut feelings in people
interesting have you worked with many
people that come to you and they've got
a clear Authority problem is there a
particular example you can think of
where you were able to help someone turn
their life around many hundreds give me
your favorite example my favorite
example was a big CEO he's in Los
Angeles
and he ask me for skills he starts off I
need I need the flight checklist I don't
need to learn to fly I just need the
checklist uh but it takes me a while to
kind of walk people back and say like
let's get to the root of this because
you can't just openly say you have an
authority and and comfort
problem
and his employees
would like openly make fun of him in
board meetings and stuff like that and
he didn't like it and it it his company
was going downhill so fast and I took
him through this process of gaining
let's let's build up your confidence
discipline leadership gratitude and
enjoyment all of those things and let's
find where your lowest point is of those
five if I could just find your lowest
point on that five list then I know the
highest leverage thing that I can do so
if the highest leverage that he can do
would be confidence that's the number
one thing I'm going to start working on
and the moment we took him through that
process say it was only a couple of
months and we used a lot of hypnosis we
used a lot of um I literally used
brainwashing techniques to help him so
it's the same techniques and you know
what uh cognitive behavioral therapy was
also a a form of brainwashing back in
the day and aversion therapy um but
within just a few months he went from
around I think 6 to 800k per month to
like 4 million a month all of his
employees were on board he he did he had
this huge shift the problem comes when
you're when you're a coach and you make
someone's life change that fast they
have to have an
excuse they can't go back to the office
and like they're different right so they
have to say some this thing happened to
me I had this thing so that's the first
thing I work out with every client is
like you need you're going to have to go
back and tell them something happened
that changed your life because you have
to have a reason that you're going back
different so watching that
transformation is so so so rewarding and
incredible but the confidence is usually
what you have to change first with
people how'd you do that you change how
what's going on inside their head so
you've gone on stage before probably a
thousand or 2,000 people you were on TV
for a
while even after you've been
successful have you ever even heard a
tiny voice that said why am I here or
like do I deserve to be here yeah I mean
this is a prime example of that yeah
yeah or I'm faking it people are going
to find out I'm I'm faking it well you
feel like that when you're a podcaster
because you you didn't get any official
qualifications and then people started
listening and then there's they think
that you know what you're doing or you
so I think I can tell that as a
podcaster yeah so and they never go away
so the difference between a person who's
confident and a person who doesn't have
confidence is that they hear those
voices as truth
and I hear them or somebody with
confidence hears them as
fiction they're both listening to the
same thing so imagine like as a quick
story if I if you and I were going to
lunch I said Stephen I'm going to come
pick you up I pull up in front of your
house you jump in the passenger side
we're heading off and I'm listening to
an audio book about a nuclear bomb going
off but it's inside the audiobook
there's a fake news report
about a nuclear bomb going off let's say
it's a pretend BBC broadcast or
something that's going off that it's in
the audiobook we start
driving I'm relaxed I'm focused on the
road I'm enjoying what I'm doing your
heart rate's increased you're fearful
you're a migdala is firing off you're in
this horrible state of like oh my God
what H what's going to happen to my
family we're both hearing the exact same
broadcast we're listening to the same
speakers at the same time but I know
that I'm hearing fiction
and you are worried that it's truth I
don't mean to use you as as that example
but
it's that's the easiest way to to
describe it and then just fundamentally
changing how you hear that voice and
nine times I think 10 times out of 10
that voice was developed when you were
eight or nine what did that kid do and
this is what I would ask any of the
clients what did that kid do to make
friends or keep them so friends to feel
safe now we're in the safety like how
did I get to feel safe and what did I do
to earn rewards and for some people that
might be recognition for other kids who
had a bad start in life that might be
water or food might have been a reward
for those kids so the way that we keep
or earn friends the way that we get
rewards as a child and the way that we
feel what we have to do to feel safe
those develop as little apps in our
brain that run in the background of our
adult lives all the time and we
typically as a kid they're great they
might have kept us safe they might have
kept us alive they might have held us
inside of these Social Circles but I'm
going to be a dick to people so that
they don't get close to me or I'm going
to kiss up to authority figures like Mom
and Dad so I'll get some recognition and
praise and that becomes an app that we
carry into adulthood without knowing it
without our consent without our
awareness that little kid brings these
things into adulthood and they just
modify so I go from having to kiss up to
a narcissistic mother to I'm going to
I'm going to kiss the boss's ass every
single day and everybody knows me as the
office kiss ass so they just translate
from child to adult behavior and if I
can start understanding that then I can
start getting that person to understand
the fundamental way to change their life
and I make them put those phrases out in
the open to where it's so I want them to
be pissed off so I will make them get a
desktop wallpaper that says I don't
deserve money money is for other people
just just to make their brains see how
stupid it is on a regular basis and put
it on a motivational
poster and the second part of that
is I any anybody who's confident has a
generalized expectation of positive
outcomes not specific but things are
going to be fine things are going to be
fine so if I can do that you can
fundamentally change someone's life so
the final point of that which leads into
discipline is I need to get you to form
a relationship with your future
self because everything that goes into
on in our life has to do with our
mamalian brain this lower part of our
brain
here and it doesn't speak English
there's no affirmation that's going to
penetrate that barrier there's no like
I'm going to read a quote on a wall or a
PowerPoint slide that's going to
fundamentally change Behavior you have
to change the animal the Mamon part of
the brain so the question I ask
everybody that I'm training is how would
I teach it to a
dog how would I how would I show my
goals if I'm setting goals for next year
how would I show that to a dog cuz I
have to get it down to a mammal so the
fastest way to do that is through Visual
means so I have all of my clients
download this app I can't remember the
name of it there's probably a hundred
but it makes you look like
95 yeah and you're just covered in
wrinkles it makes a lot of your hair
kind of go away and I make them print it
out and put it everywhere just for a
couple of weeks and now we start
developing a mental mamalian in
relationship with our future self which
changes how I eat changes how I spend
money it changes maybe what time I go to
bed how much alcohol I drink and mostly
uh where I'm getting my dopamine from if
I draw a map of everywhere I'm getting
my dopamine from and more than 50% of it
is on alcohol or porn or you know all of
these things that I don't want that's
you have to be very very honest with
yourself at that point of where do I
need to get dopamine front of in my life
and successful people every single
successful person that I've ever met has
a good dopamine map so they they get
dopamine from good sources instead of
bad ones and is there a relationship
between discipline and confidence I
think so very much it's like if if you
and I were sitting in an airport
together let's say we're sitting in
Atlanta airport and I just asked you
with and you're not a behavior profiler
as far as I know but I said Stephen look
around and find somebody that's
disciplined it would take you 5 seconds
because we don't need to to profile
people that's a natural thing that you
picked up on it on purpose but we pick
up on it unconsciously all the time so
having that level of discipline elevates
our level of confidence automatically
because we know that other people are
going to pick up on it but we also know
I'm moving up and I'm probably more in
control of myself than the person that
I'm talking to or the people that I'm
I'm dealing with regularly so so how we
live off camera is coming through in our
confidence that's the exact thing that
we were talking about that environment
time appearance and if I can live off
camera the same
way that I want to be perceived by
everybody in my life my confidence
already starts to
grow and you said enjoyment as well was
one of the five yeah why is enjoyment
important I added it on there it it took
a while but I walked through every body
I've ever trained and if you look at
everyone who is a natural leader and has
that level of authority they are not
just partying in the moment but just in
calmly enjoying what is happening now so
maybe you could call it mindfulness but
I think in just the trait of enjoyment
and being in enjoyment is the most
magnetic human trait that there
is what do I need to know about
observation which is the second part of
your triangle to success or
failure observation being able to read a
room is it possible to be able to read a
room yeah how would I go about reading a
room okay so if if you're reading like a
public area yeah let's go back to the
airport maybe yeah if I'm in a public
area I really want to pay attention to
the slowest moving person in the room I
want to pay attention to who is more
confident than the other person and
that's typically going back to speed and
if I'm if I'm reading other people well
I'm also making a lot of eye contact
with them so that's also one of the
fastest ways to get a read on another
human being is how often they're
blinking and if a person is blinking
fast it's a sign of high stress if
they're blinking really slow it's a sign
of focus so it's not always relaxation
so if I talk to a psychopath and a
interrogation room or in a business
negotiation and they're very focused on
prey so we call that a prey
Focus because they're going to
manipulate somebody their blink rate
will almost be at zero if I talk to
somebody who's being deceptive their
blink rate can go up to like a 75 80
without us even knowing it so one of the
reasons that blink rate is so reliable
is that it's unconscious we don't
realize the shifts in blink rate and we
don't manually control it very well
and if all that I would ever need to
teach somebody you don't have to count
or know how many times per minute it's
going on is if I'm in a conversation I'm
going to start the conversation and say
is the blink rate normal does it look
fast does it look slow so what I'm
really looking for in human behavior are
changes changes so if I'm on stage and
if I'm let's say I'm doing a keynote and
across the room I'm making eye contact
with all these people and I start seeing
an increase in audience blink rate I I
know I need to change the subject or
change the topic right away so would you
be looking at one particular person no
so generally yeah so I would look at all
of these eyes and pretend like I'm
looking at one
human okay does that make sense getting
an average of the yeah so as I'm looking
around how many blinks do I see and I'm
going to pretend as if that was one
human eye okay so when you get a lower
blink rate people are paying more
attention yeah you're doing a great job
and you can I go to these pitch meetings
where these uh entrepreneurs will go up
and Pitch these Angel Investors and
stuff like that up in Washington and you
can measure who will pitch based on
blink rate you see a blink rate drop
that is the most interested person in
the room we do the same thing with jury
selection it's so reliable and you you
read these articles about like someone
breathing into their chest it takes a
while to get good at that with your
peripheral vision because I've taught it
to people and they would have spend a
conversation with someone staring at
their chest and especially if you're
talking to a woman it's a bad idea so
blink rate is incredibly reliable so to
recap that skill yeah I start a
conversation does it look pretty normal
is it pretty fast or kind of slow then
I'm going to look for changes and that's
all I'm looking for in a room of people
is what's
changing so 70 is deceptive and zero is
psychopath 70 is stress not always decep
okay and zero is psychopath basically
zero might be psychopath context is the
second letter C there's five C's that we
talk about in Behavior profiling so
change then context MH so now it like
somebody just crossed their arms and you
read the internet it says it's being
defensive withholding closed off see all
that stuff well what if it's freezing
cold yeah so now we have Contex so
interesting that actually happened in my
last conversation I um I try not to
close off my body when I'm doing this
cuz some sometimes my natural reaction
is to go like this and then sometimes
especially in here when it gets later
and we didn't have the fan in the heater
I would go like this yeah and what I'm
if like the I was thinking but this is
rude the rude to the guest but I looked
at my arms and I had these like massive
Goosebumps and I was like that's the
context yeah the context is I'm
freezing yeah but to the guest it would
look like I'm going like this yeah you
know so this is why body language is so
delicate I think is delicate and it's so
hard to for people to do peer-reviewed
research on it because there's a million
variables it's like saying well why
should Roger Federer win a tennis match
when he doesn't have any peer-reviewed
studies to back up what he's doing yeah
it's the same thing with body language
because like they're doing interrogation
research so they're saying that a
college kid who gets a lunch voucher and
walks in and pretends to to lie about a
duck is exactly the same as someone
who's been captured in combat sleep
deprived for a few days has a black hood
over their head and they're drugg into
an interrogation room and they're saying
those behaviors are identical then
there's the peer-reviewed research on
lying and not lying it's so you cannot
replicate human behavior that well so
and people treat it like it's a
pharmaceutical like I can put a Tylenol
in somebody and I can measure all these
responses and it doesn't really go into
aad spr sheet like that and there's a
lot of great research out there but I'd
say it's just so incredibly hard to
replicate everything in with perfection
like that so what was the first C first
C is change I want to look for a change
and then you want to look at context is
there a third C that would be clusters
clusters so then you read articles that
say
someone looks a certain way or does a
certain thing that might be deceptive
like the most common one I hear is
someone touches their nose so someone
touching their nose might be being de
cve if you're just seeing one
thing I would say that never almost
never means anything you want to look
for a cluster of behavior so they
started getting nervous which is a
change they're it's because I'm asking
about where they were on Wednesday night
there's the context and while they were
getting nervous they also started
protecting their genitals with their
hands and licking their lips which is a
hygienic gesture that we do so now I
have a change within the context that's
appropriate and there's a cluster of
Behavior after that I screen through
culture is there some part of this
person's culture or background uh that
makes them do that like I was with a
young person we were watching a
Pakistani person get inter interrogated
and you know how you you commonly see
that kind of headshake oh yeah in that
region of the world they said I was
shaking his head while he's saying yes
like now we get down to that sea this is
culture which rules out uh that Behavior
or gets rid of it and finally the most
the least important thing on that list
is the
checklist and by checklist I mean there
is a list of known behaviors that are
likely to be deception and if you're in
body language you deal in likelihood
that's all we deal in some people say
they're 100% sure on stuff and I'm
skeptical but we deal in likelihood so
we should always process in that so
someone licking their lips or moving a
certain way if it's in on a checklist
does not mean that it's deceptive MH cuz
what if they do it all the time then we
don't have a change does that make sense
yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah I was thinking
about things I used to do when I was
younger and there was just a period of
my life where for some bizarre reason I
used to go like this and I used to do it
all the time a tick it was almost like a
tick yeah you know what's really weird I
think this sounds like a really crazy
thing to say
but one of my best friends had like
curtains
like the haircut curtains okay and he
used to flick it and I almost like
vicariously picked up the like flicking
from him I'd go like that all the time
but I was just thinking if someone saw
me doing that they would perceive that
as some some form of behavior whereas it
was just this weird thing that lasted
for like two years when I was younger
and then went away yeah but did you do
it all the time I just did it I oh I
don't know I felt like I just did it
randomly but that that wouldn't be a
change okay yeah if I if I was meting
you yeah and
you were on the Dragon's Den for a while
still yeah and people pitch you yeah all
kinds of
ideas that just having somebody on the
show or just having those skills with
you you could see through a lot of those
people and whether or not they're being
honest about what they're pitching
they're confident about what they're
pitching and you could look at a show
like Shark Tank and I can look at I can
watch any episode of Shark Tank and look
who's blinking the least MH they're
they're going to be the first to make an
offer 99% of the time because they're
the most focused on what's going on
they're they're personally
invested so that's fascinating is that
just you could just look at one or two
things and predict stress or focus and
just being able to do that if you just
took that one thing away from this that
would be a
superpower because I sit here with
guests right and they talk about their
life stories and stuff and I often see
some patterns of Behavior yeah
specifically like closing up when you
ask someone something about their
childhood or a specific sensitive
subject in their life you tend to see
like self I call it like self- soothing
Behavior to some degree so it's
difficult and it's funny because we
we're all like amateur body language
experts now yeah because there's been a
lot of stuff online saying spot this did
they touch their nose Etc so it can also
be dangerous it can and it can give us
these like oh I saw this one thing I'm
never doing business with that guy yeah
and like he scratched his nose three
times while he was talking about that
well he's look in his briefcase he's got
allergy medication in there he's
scratching his nose the season just
changed it Springtime his nose is red
when he came in so he's been scratching
it for 30 minutes before he walked in
the door so now we we start to realize
I'm not seeing a change I'm seeing
something that was repetitive and
communication is the third one in the
Triangle to success or failure
communication so what I've got so far is
talking slow is higher authority yeah is
there anything else that if I want to be
a master Communicator I should be
thinking about
absolutely
oh when it comes to communication a
being a good Storyteller is great and
there's a million podcasts out there
that can teach somebody that but it
comes down to whether or not you can
speak to the person that you are in
front of MH and understanding what kind
of person that is and there's a few ways
that I identify I I segregate people
into six groups and that's through what
do they need from other people so what
kind of things do I need
socially and these are
significance
acceptance
approval intelligence pity and strength
or SL
power and in every conversation if you
ask somebody about themselves they're
going to come across
and reveal one of those things to you so
if I know that you are a significance
driven person and I'm selling you on how
smart of an idea this is and how
intelligent you are for making this
Choice I'm
communicating way opposite in what you
need to hear so the moment that I hear
you talk about yourself your
accomplishments what you like in life
what happened for you this week what's a
great memory that you have every
conversation you're going to hear this
stuff starting to get revealed so you
hear somebody Within These are
conversation or things that you could
hear in a conversation pretty quickly
you start talking to somebody and they
said yeah I'm actually the CEO of that
company I've got 490 people that work
for me and I'm probably going to be
making an exit sometime next year so you
hear that there's significance right uh
then you then you listen for approval is
this is when you hear people say well I
got to go up on stage tomorrow Tom but I
suck at public speaking I'm going to I'm
going to really bomb at it I'm just
really nervous trying to get you to say
no no you don't suck you're great you
did great last time you're going to rock
this you got this then you have the
acceptance people they'll always use the
terms like we us our and just team so
acceptance people are all about like I'm
a member of some kind of group and
that'll come across in their
communication so you ask a significance
person about a vacation and they say I
went down to Miami it was fantastic I
had a great time and I just got back
last night you ask an acceptance person
they'll say we went down there all of us
went to this thing and we did this so
you hear a lot of this language that
talks about groups and membership you
get into the intelligence side how often
do you hear people go yeah I actually
got my MBA from this person oh I did my
Master's thesis on that do you hear this
intelligence stuff come out of people
and the pity is you can identify a Pity
person pretty well and those are the
hardest people to communicate to and the
pity person always like if I want to
give you the ideal thing to say to each
one of these people the pity person
wants to hear I can't believe all the
stuff that you've been through and
you've got to this point because I don't
think many people would have pity wants
recognition of
suffering and finally we have the
strength and power person and this isn't
always Biff from Back to the Future
so it's can be somebody who's a leader
in a company they want but they want
control so significance is do I make a
difference strength and power is do I
have control over other people these are
the everybody from like the leader who
kind of forces his way into the top to
the guy with the ridiculous jacked up
pickup truck that has like the plastic
testicles hanging off of the back of it
and once you understand what
categorization someone fits into how
would you show up in a way that's
effective in communicating with them say
for example if I'm talking to a
significance person yeah do I
just and and I'm trying to close a deal
with them or something do I Pander to
their significance is that yeah so
there's a few other types that we teach
intelligence people to identify there's
the six ways we make decisions and then
six ways that we have values which is
our end goal that we want but I want to
speak in a way that says this decision
is going to increase your level of
significance and I want to compliment
them on their level of significance
right before I ask them for something so
I could say You Stephen um this is a
great podcast you've got millions of
subscribers and it's obvious you make a
difference in so many people's lives and
you are a significance person so that
would be effective uh for you because I
know that you want to make the biggest
difference that you can and I want to
speak in a way that a speaks to their
needs and lets them know that I'm I am a
source for that but B that making this
decision whatever the whatever we're
talking about selling a car whatever is
going to increase your ability to get
that same need from other people so I
think if we did this together I think
the number one thing that's going to
happen right away is you're going to be
able to impact twice as many people
you're going to leave a much deeper
footprint on the world so I'm giving you
we're going to double your subscribers
or your listeners but not just that
you're going to make a bigger impact and
Legacy on the
world so every time I'm thinking about
needs always think in terms of
neurotransmitters so if I can compliment
someone on their need that's what we
need from other people so I'm giving
them like 500 million neurotransmitters
being released when they hear this so
it's not just that we
are kind of suffering and insecure and
all these things that we talked about a
minute ago we're also drug addicts
everybody we just need to identify the
drug that that person's addicted
to I was thinking about the pen I was
like I was going to ask you to if I'm
a if I'm an INT intelligence person and
you had to sell me the pen yeah how
would you go about that you know I think
there's a lot of people in the world out
there and I think most people just do
what other people do and I'm sure you
would agree there's so many idiots out
there that just get with the basic thing
I'm going to do this basic thing and
they don't really go outside the box
very often and every once in a while
there's you meet somebody who knows
higher quality things you and you meet
somebody who is able to see things at a
level different than other people and I
would talk about that intelligence while
subconsciously I'm associating all of
that with this this is different it's
Unique it's a pencil um but it's it's
not like other pencil it's not the basic
run-of-the-mill thing so I want to
present that in a way and I want to
start with a negative comment and this
is one of the most effective persuasion
strategies is to I'm going to negatively
associate something I don't want you to
have so let's say uh we're starting our
podcast and I'm I'm afraid Stephen's not
going to connect with me and I know that
you're significance
driven as we started out imagine if I
said something at the very beginning of
this podcast and I said Stephen
thanks for having me man and there's so
many people out there and when anytime I
say something negative in a conversation
I never want to gesture in between you
and me I always want to gesture away so
this is we're talking about other people
you know there's so many people out
there who
just don't really give back to the world
and they don't really have an interest
in helping other people and it's like
every time you meet one of those people
you sit down with them it's like all of
them have the same thing in common they
can't just stop and connect
when they sit down with
somebody so I'm demonizing a trait using
your
needs that I don't want you to have like
the inability to connect ah okay
interesting and you're consciously
pointing off to adjust it to it's others
not right until I said the word connect
and then I gestured between you and me
back and forth between both of us and
that word stop is a very powerful word
in the English language so when I that
it's like all of them have the same
quality to them they can't just
stop and fully connect with somebody
else that's a very subtle thing but I've
used your neurotransmitters I've used
your needs and I've I've got you to
agree you nodded your head
if agree that those people don't really
connect well with other people so that's
how powerful that stuff can be and you
can use the same thing in the in
reverse and I could I could say a
positive thing I could say you know
Stephen what's fascinating to me is I've
gone around the world I've met several
entrepreneurs I've met people who are on
TV and it's like you think that they are
just dismissive offand before you meet
them and it's incredible when you meet
these people it's like all of them have
this ability to just tune everything out
and just completely connect with
somebody and that would have the same
effect and what what's going on there
people we want
to be that person because it's positive
we want to live up to that expectation
set right so what I've done is I've
gotten you to say um as Chris Voss would
put it that's right okay but I've got
you to say that about who you are as a
person okay so now I'm not changing your
ideas I'm changing your
identity changing my Identity or yeah
because you've made an agreement about
who you are you've nodded your head okay
and if I wanted to take that further
I would I would make an admission first
and I'd say you know what I've had
social anxiety growing up and I'm
curious what is it that have you always
been able to just connect with everybody
you talked to or is this something that
you had to work
on oh was that a question yeah okay but
I know it's not a question Yeah Yeah
question the moment that you ask that
that you start to answer that question
you stepped you've made an agreement
about who you are as a person so if I
wanted somebody to be less close
off I might say you know I've spent my
whole life just worried about what other
people think and it it to I was 25
before I got to a point where I was able
to open up have you always been this
open with people or did you have to work
on that so just any answer and no one's
going to give you an answer like
actually I'm just closed off I'm very
close-minded and that's maybe a 0.1% of
people so small agreements and none of
these are designed for people to take
word for word word I guess they can but
it's about the idea of getting someone
to comment on their own identity who
they are as a person is there anything
else as it relates to communication
that's especially important it's funny
that so many people are interested in
the communication part more so than the
listening part they want the flight
checklist yeah I was think of Julian
treasure who did the Ted Talk on how to
be a great speaker he told me he also
did a Ted Talk on how to be a great
listener no no one listened he said
everyone wanted to his one on speaking
has got like 35 million views but the
one on listening just no one's
interested in that but I'm I'm guessing
listening plays a pretty critical role
to being a great speaker yeah and
listening means I can identify who you
are and what the needs that are driving
you and the social needs and the the way
that you make decisions is that part of
the observation part yes
absolutely just listening to that means
that now I have the right words to use
for the communication and the right the
right understanding of what motivates
you as a person so if I'm a therapist
that makes me a better therapist if I'm
a hostage negotiator that makes me a
better hostage negotiator and if I'm a
suicide hotline operator that makes me
way better at my job because I'm
understanding exactly who I'm talking to
and my goal is to talk someone into
doing something that they normally would
not do you talk about this
elicitation yeah what is elicitation
it's a CIA technique right it is it was
originally came up with by this guy
named John Nolan and his book is no
longer for sale you have to get it on
eBay like it's hard to find but the book
is called confidential why isn't it no
longer for sale I think that he just
kind of pulled it off the shelf I'm not
sure okay so elicitation is about using
statements instead of questions and I'll
give you an example let's say you and I
walk into Whole Foods which is we're in
New York so it's probably a block away
somewhere we walk in there and there's
uh let's say there's a young lady
stocking
produce and you get in there and I say
all right Stephen your goal is to go
figure out how much she makes in 60
seconds and you're not allowed to ask
any questions or be
awkward and that's tough right it's it
sounds really tough so if you went over
to her and and this is a a
generalization just to get you to
understand what elicitation is
and said heyy I'm trying to find the
baby carrots and she walks you over
there but while you're walking you say I
just read this article online it says
all Whole Foods employees just got
bumped up to $26 an hour that's
fantastic and she turns around goes
what no I I make
17 so now she doesn't feel like she's
been pressed or questioned about how
much she makes she's correcting you mhm
or if you let's say you got into an Uber
tonight and you said I just read this
article that Uber drivers were one of
the top most highly
satisfied employees in the country
you're going to get a
correction and you're going to be like
what where did you read that so
triggering A need to correct the record
is one of the easiest ways to use
elicitation but it's only one another
one is just making a statement
afterwards and saying I bet you had some
interesting exper experiences doing that
or I can imagine that was challenging
statements are always going to be better
than asking pointed questions because a
person feels like they're volunteering
information the third layer of that is
disbelief so let's say I wanted to ask
if you just got back from vacation and I
didn't want to use any questions we
let's say we meet up for dinner or
something and I said see you look like
you just got back from a vacation
that's a statement and you're like no
actually I've been doing this this this
and this so now you've you've given me
more than if I just asked if you were on
vacation MH and I said wow that had to
be interesting I I can't imagine that
there's got to be a lot of stuff going
on there and you start talking more and
more and more and then like that sounds
great there was no challenges to that
entire trip I love when everything is
100% Flawless and you're like no
actually and then you start going into
that and I'm like no way then now we
have disbelief that comes in and I
haven't asked a single question yet so
that's one thing that I challenge
everybody that I train to get really
good at is that elicitation piece how
many layers can I get into a person or a
conversation just using these statements
and that's why I wrote a there's a whole
chapter about it in in this book here
but that elicitation is powerful
because we're not being asked questions
so our brain doesn't set off little
security alarms and this is how Soviet
spies would get information from a
19-year-old US Navy
sailor uh in the early days of the Cold
War they s ship would pull into Thailand
or submarine would pull into Thailand or
Singapore and a Russian would go up and
these Sailors would be drinking at the
bar Russian would sit there he's got a a
loha shirt on or
something and strike up a conversation
they say
I know that the the German submarines
could outrun you because their
propellers are 22 and all of your
submarine propellers are 18 fet in
diameter and the Sailor slightly drunk
turns around and say no they're not and
starts giving up all this information
just to correct the record and that's
all they did back then was just
correcting the record I'm triggering
this need to offer some kind of
Correction to information that's
inaccurate and even with business
intelligence let's say the a company's
moving and they have to get business
intelligence somebody at that company
will get approached at a bar and
somebody will say yeah I heard you guys
are moving between March and
April and they'll get corrected in they
say no it's actually February but we're
not really supposed to talk about it
it's like there's no way you're going to
move in February it's too cold and the
interest rates are up too high there's
no possible way that the CEO would ever
do that it's like yeah and then you're
going you're going to get more
information out because of the disbelief
so that was correcting the record a
second technique called bracketing where
I'm giving you a series like between
March and may or between 39 and 59 and
the third is the disbelief that starts
getting this information out of people
so if you want to think about like how
do I start a conversation or continue
one using elicitation think of the words
so and then do a recap so you've been
doing this for three years or so this is
not the best job but it's getting things
done for you or I bet so I bet that was
I bet there were still some challenges
there I bet you overcame a whole lot to
get to this point so or I bet is the
best way to do that and when okay so if
I say I bet you hate that coffee yeah
that that's a statement but you're gonna
Endeavor to correct the record either
way yeah and if you do hate the coffee
you'll say yeah like even you saying yes
I do kind of hate it is offering up
information yeah okay interesting and
you could even go go on with that like I
bet you hate that coffee and somebody
says yeah well I do kind of hate it like
I can imagine you're the kind of person
who likes coffee a very specific way
well yeah here's how I like it a lot and
say that's extremely
interesting no creamer no sugar and I'm
just recapping so why is that better
than me just
going how' you prefer your coffee well
if we're just talking about coffee it's
not sensitive information so I wouldn't
I wouldn't say that was better it's for
sensitive information when you're trying
to not get their guard up yeah so the
rule of thumb is the more sensitive the
information is that you need the less
questions you need to be asking and is
that what I mean that's does correlate
to kind of like how I've uh the
information that the spies I've
interviewed have given me like Andrew
Bustamante and Mike Baker they've both
said that much of the game was like
hearing someone out and just letting
them talk and talk and talk and talk
yeah but not being too pushy yeah and
that's that's the best way to not be
pushy is to use the elicitation stuff
perception context permission the PCP
model is a way of understanding how to
get someone to do something from joining
a cult to buying an item yeah so the PCP
model looks like it's three steps but
it's I I want you to view it as kind of
dominoes so one step starts the progress
of coming down the other and once that
comes down the next Domino starts going
down m so if I change your perception
about
something then I change the context that
you're viewing that in which changes the
way that you feel permission to do it so
I'll give you an example would you want
a weird example or a boring one we we'll
go with let's go with weird Okay so
let's go with uh an
attorney in Washington state
was charged with assault of a woman
using
hypnosis and he would have her get naked
in his
office which is something she would not
normally do
and the attorney was studying this
hypnosis and stuff like that he wasn't I
don't as as far as I know he was not
even
good but he would hypnotize her and then
tell
her at the end of the day you come home
from work and this is just like that
time I want you to picture yourself it's
the end of the day you're coming home
from work you drop your keys in the bowl
you make your way to the bathroom you
turn on a hot shower and now you're here
getting ready to get into that shower so
he's changed her perception of where she
is he changed the context of neither one
of you or me right now would like get
naked on a podcast but both of us are
going to later tonight when we go to
shower so but because that's a different
context so he modified the context which
gave her permission to remove clothing
or do something that we otherwise
wouldn't do in a social
setting one of the ways I studied this
and it was fascinating is cult
recruiters I spent a a long time well
six weeks working with these cult
recruiters and I was back and forth
between cult recruiters and door-to-door
salespeople and these are hard-hit
people man that it's a hard job door
to-door
sales but they talk people into doing
things they probably
wouldn't otherwise have done M uh
installing a
$95,000 solar system on their roof or
buying a vacuum cleaner or joining a
cult that's probably
harmful but all of them started off the
conversation by changing the perception
of what's going on so instead of me
saying hey let me talk to you about this
thing that's from a like a needy
perspective they come out with a
survey and they say it's it's an
anonymous survey which automatically
makes the people more open so it's an
anonymous survey I've changed permission
so now the context has shifted slightly
and if I could change your perception
again would you rather be in a group of
people who feel like family or people
who are related to you so I start asking
all these little questions about how
would you rather lived your life in a
way that's like just kind of nudging you
down into this cult mindset of like do
you want to be around people that enjoy
your company like those kind of
questions so more perception changes now
the context shifts to where I've just
made 25 agreements about who I am as a
human
being so now my my context is way off
which shifts my permission it's like I
have permission to do this because
that's the kind of person I've just
agreed to be and that's who I've said
that I am I have to do this because
that's cognitive dissonance like crazy
and one thing I teach you about any
persuasion whether you're doing a scop
on an entire country or you're just
manipulating one person or doing therapy
on one person your main weapon as a
person who is persuasive or influential
is cognitive dissonance which is I'm
getting you to be uncomfortable because
I'm get the way that I've got you to see
the world doesn't match up with what
you're doing so the fast easiest thing
for you to change is what you're doing
instead of changing your mind about
something or calling yourself dumb I
just get you to do something different
and that's weaponized cognitive
dissonance we're seeing a lot of that
with the extreme left extreme right
Politics on both both of those extremes
once I get a person to
make even one or two or three statements
about their identity I have drastically
altered how they're going to behave in
the future uh Robert
chalini who wrote influence and
persuasion wonderful human being wrote
about this where a few
weeks before they go ask somebody to put
a giant ugly sign in their yard that
says drive safe huge ugly sign two weeks
before that they go back door to door
and say do you support safe driving yes
or
no who's going to say no it's like 91%
said yeah yeah I support safe driving
they said good will you put this tiny
sticker in your front window tiny little
sticker and just to let us know that
you're supporting safe driving that's
all we all we ask you to do two weeks
later they come back to the neighborhood
like 89% of people are sticking these
signs in their yard the other
neighborhood they did the test on didn't
have this little survey do you support
safe driving first and it was like 6%
stuck the sign in their yard so making
one agreement about who I am and then
taking action on it so if I can get you
to take AC ction on something not in
just between you and me now I got you to
put a sticker on your window I got you
to do something that alters the way
other people see you so if I can get you
to make something that I've got you to
believe public I get you to make a
Twitter post I get you to make a
Facebook post now I've captured identity
so most persuasion and influence
training in the world is about capturing
ideas identity is where you truly get to
change Behavior because I'm getting you
to agree that you are a certain type of
person before I want you to do
anything
interesting it explains a lot about
politics in fact you know what we what
we see go on in the election cycles and
also just how a a political party
political group can slowly
drift together to a position that
objectively go blood L that's crazy yeah
you know because they kind of slowly
they say I'm this party I signed up to
this this particular political party and
then slowly just with like creep of
beliefs you end up over 10 years all of
you believing in thinking something is
okay yeah it's interesting just because
you made an agreement I guess in part
that explains some of the wars as well
like there's an element here which can
be can explain things like Nazi Germany
yeah and how a civilization can go from
being relatively normal to doing really
horrific barbaric things to people yeah
if you just going back to the milgrim
experiment right away I got you to say
do you fully volunteer to participate in
this would you accept the role of
teacher would you sit down in this chair
would you shock him with this low
voltage I've got you to agree that I'm
the kind of person that's willing to
shock someone for an experiment within
the first two minutes MH and they don't
talk about that they they kind of tend
to say the whole experiment is about
Authority but I don't think it's all
authority I think a lot of it is novelty
and they don't talk about that ever in
the these Recaps of the study but if you
volunteer for that experiment you're
driving on a campus youve probably not
been on going into a building you've
never been to meeting a guy in a lab
coat that you've never met and another
guy you've never met in a room that
you've never met sat in front of a
machine you've never seen reading a quiz
that you've never read in your entire
life all of these things brand new the
number one thing that generates focus in
the Alan brain this is dog you name it
is
novelty so our ancestors they're walking
past a bush every day of their life and
one day Sun's about to set and a stick
snaps behind that bush that's novelty
that's an unexpected piece of
information new information or is it
unexpected yeah what's your definition
of novelty here novelty is my brain is
expecting certain things to happen I'm
going to walk past this bush just like
I've done before I have kind of a script
for running things and something happens
that breaks that script of what I am
predicting about the world does that
make sense yeah any kind of novelty
generates Focus so the four things that
we can manipulate inside of a human
brain uh spells out the word fate so the
four ways to manipulate or influence a
mammal and this is human dog you name it
is through Focus
Authority
tribe and
emotion those are the four things that a
dog could feel if you're looking at a
dog training video you're
watching let's say you're binge watching
three seasons of dog whisperer with
Caesar Milan you're seeing him redirect
Focus establish Authority show contact
with the tribe and praise the dog when
the dog's doing well Focus Authority
tribe and emotion that's how we train
animals it's also how an infomercial
gets you to buy something they grab your
focus they show you here's
a a million people who've already bought
it so far they all have these five-star
reviews everybody in your neighborhood's
doing it or all these people across the
United States are doing it they're
getting success and all of their friends
love them because of that success now we
get emotion and they show it visually
they don't just say it they're showing
this visual images to show the mammal
brain the f Focus Authority tribe and
emotion that spells fate I was thinking
about a lot of like um fizzy drink ads
in the Su in the sunshine in the summer
and you see you know like the you hear
the sound like as they like break it
open there's people there I guess that's
the tribe having a great time and I was
just struggling with the authority part
in that context of those ads you see for
like a fizzy drink brand I think the
authority would be the on screen
presence or brand recognition okay or
could be a celebrity or something yeah
and this is coming from a tribal leader
as if our ancestors didn't listen to a
tribal leader you don't live very long
in your work you talk about how to win
an argument and when I say win an
argument I don't really mean an argument
I mean more like you know me and my
girlfriend are having a conversation
yeah and I want to get to a good
resolution what are the things I should
definitely not
do calling out little
points that any kind of in correct
information we wait until the end we
save it okay so if I hear if I'm in an
argument with someone and they're
calling me out for doing something I
clearly didn't do I'll wait I want to
wait why because they get diffused now
we want them to get that out
first but right away as soon as possible
in any argument like this I want to
establish
like do we have a similar Common Ground
do we have what common ground do we
share and do we want a similar outcome
and I might even ask that question be
like really quick do we both want the
same thing from from this discussion I
would never call it an
argument so one the moment that we
redirect
on I this is the outcome I want instead
of I need to win an argument because
when we're in a fight we tend to think I
intellectually need to conquer this
conversation and I need to be right and
if I can be right that means I was right
not winning an argument doesn't mean you
were right before before or right after
but it's like what is the ideal outcome
for both of us and I would stop in a
business negotiation or whatever what's
ideal for both of us we both want this
same thing and the ideal outcome for you
is this the ideal outcome for me is this
and I think there's some Middle Ground
here and it would be the same thing in a
relationship if anything started
spinning out of control the first thing
I'm going to think is I'm going to
hear what's not being said so if my wife
was
saying you don't even need to call me
you don't call me anyway when you're on
these business trips I never get phone
calls do you think she is worried that
her phone isn't ringing or she's worried
that she's not being appreciated and and
not feeling loved
so men especially will will tend to say
well let's let's open these facts really
quick pull your phone out I'm going to
show you some Miss calls right now it's
not about the calls I need to hear
what's underneath the statements that
someone is saying you need to hear
between the lines just like a behavior
profiler so what is the what's the
emotion that's starting here is it anger
is it loneliness is it feeling
unappreciated I need to understand what
the emotion is behind what someone's
saying and address that and never
address exactly what people are saying
to try to win an argument I just posted
a video on YouTube U three days ago of
it was called the n narcissist off
switch and it was how to disarm any
narcissist and there were these very
specific methods but the the biggest
method of all was to always think about
what they're are using to get out of you
so if I'm in an argument is someone
using fear obligation or guilt and that
acronym spells
fog so am I going to get in trouble or
can I recognize when somebody is using
fear obligation and guilt and if someone
is doing any of those things I want to
call it out in a non-confrontational way
so let's say
um you give me some line about like if
you don't do this I'm going to have to
work 19 hours next week so it's never
about the hours and it's now it's guilt
right M I could say Stephen
it maybe you didn't mean to but it
sounded like you wanted me to feel
guilty about me working next week and I
know know that you're a good person I
don't think you meant it that way so I
will absolutely call out any fear
obligation or guilt always but I'll call
it out in a way that says maybe you
didn't mean this but it sounded like
this is what you were saying right here
and I always want to use that word where
it's non-confrontational and I want to
give them an out so in interrogation
training we always call this the golden
bridge in The Art of War they say give
your opponent a golden bridge on which
they can can Retreat mhm so they can
Retreat across this golden bridge and
trap them in a corner yeah so we give
them an out that's beautiful so maybe
you didn't mean this and I always want
to think about going back to that what
is the hidden feeling or fear that's
behind what they're saying they're
scared of something they're scared of
losing a deal they're scared of losing
money they're scared of looking a
certain way they're scared of what the
people in the room are going to think so
where is the hidden fear in someone's
argument any anytime you're in an
argument there is a level of concealed
fear and just 30 40 seconds you can find
that and a lot of people teach this as a
tactic but just stopping and looking at
a person after they do that in an
argument is so incredibly powerful just
stopping and looking at them yeah so
like say you made that statement to me
about I'm G to have to work 19 hours
next
week the moment that I stop it lessens
the power
of that statement because I'm not
stopping as a tactic I'm choosing to
stop because I want to process what you
are saying and that helps people to do
that because it feels less awkward as if
I'm doing a tactic I'm doing that thing
but I'm just pausing because I'm going
to actually reflect on what you just
said and I'm going to use that time for
just a minute I might look away I might
as soon as you're done talking I might
say and I might just take a moment and
say Stephen it's maybe I heard this
wrong and go right into that so that
long pause is so effective in
conversation especially when it's
meaningful and it's not a tactic what is
the most important thing we haven't
talked about that we should have as it
especially as it relates to what most
people ask you about and they're most
interested in well what is one thing
that no one's ever asked you on a
podcast what is one thing no one's ever
ask me
yeah people don't really ask me stuff
well who are you and what is your
mission
oh you're doing something on me I'm not
doing something unless you were doing
something to me I would love to
know and why don't you answer that and
I'll break down the hidden statements
that you're going to reveal about your
personality okay uh who am I
uh uh I'm a podcaster I'm an
entrepreneur I'm an investor I'm a
boyfriend and what's my mission
H it's to pursue my potential and to
follow my curiosity and to see what
happens all right yeah
so that's a great answer but you went
deeply into who you are as a person so
the first thing you did is look up and
to your right yeah then you looked up to
your left then up into the center so
that when your eyes are moving in
multiple directions is called a trans
derivational search so I'm looking in
different file cabinets that are inside
my head yeah and then then you talked
about some of the labels that you wore
yeah and podcaster was first but you
mentioned boyfriend so I know what's
important to you so like the podcast you
don't say I'm a TV star but most people
would identify you as as a TV star but
it wasn't important to you yeah it's not
important to me right yeah so you could
hear what's important to people
interesting and then the mission was not
about other people it was about like how
can I make myself better you may be
doing that to enrich other people's Liv
but you didn't say I have a podcast so I
can
benefit 10 million are you about to hit
10 million yeah it's interesting because
I actually my brain like it was right
there to say that and then I thought
it's just not the nature of the truth
like the truth is I started this in my
bedroom and I always think about the
fact that when I did it for three years
no one was listening so my mission when
I was doing it was genuinely because I
really loved it yeah it wasn't like I'm
going to change the world and it's so
tempting sometimes to like add that on
like I want to change the world and I
just don't I don't believe that's why
most people start things and continue
when no one's listening yeah I think
it's it's usually something more selfish
does that make sense yeah you started
something and you were passionate about
the thing itself enjoyed the thing yeah
yeah yeah I love that that was a
licitation oh okay what you just did
then well three I think I did three
layers okay
but it's very very genuine and a lot of
people get to the subscriber thing I'm I
think I'll hit a million in a week or
two which is a huge milestone for me I
never thought I would have a million
but that was never important on your
main channel on uh the behavior panel
it's me and three other Behavior
profilers ah yes that's incredible yeah
it's amazing licitation that was a
elicitation good job
so we just record zooms don't edit them
at all I've seen it I know I'm I was
just trying to meiss it so
sloppy so you sorry you were doing like
a read of me you said I said podcaster I
said entrepreneur I said invester and
then I said I do it to like I think I
said um so your gos curiosity and then I
was the other one it was like it was
about my potential that's what I think
about a lot like pursue my potential and
follow my curiosity yeah
see what happens so potential curiosity
what would I see there so I'm a
podcaster I did this for passion I want
my I want to fulfill my potential am I
seeing I'm not seeing
acceptance I'm not seeing that you need
approval from me to do anything so it's
about your personal level of
significance like do I make a difference
but not to other people but you still
want people to acknowledge that you are
Reaching Your Potential you are doing
what you say you're going to do you're
relying on your girlfriend so we're
talking about a little bit of a group
but all of what you're saying is about
significance so when I say like you make
a tremendous difference in people's
lives and you're really enriching other
people you're doing exactly what you're
born to
do it hits harder than if I said lots of
people appreciate you and you're in so
many great Social Circles and you're
like the center of attention in room
yeah see that little Grimace yeah but
other people who are like the more
approval group focused people when I say
like I can tell like you're the center
of all your groups of friends and
everybody comes to you for advice you
seem like one of those people which is
an elicitation statement by itself as
well so you can tell that if I used
anything that didn't fit your psychology
it feels weird yeah and if a
salesperson's doing that they do it by
accident and they say oh this is a
numbers game because I don't I I use
this script that I have I kind of follow
this script pretty Loosely and I close
of 41% or whatever it
is in reality if you changed how you
communicate based on the sub parts of
that person's psychology which are on
public display and they're private
thoughts but they're very public if you
know how to listen to what people are
saying and understand what people are
saying you can put that out and it
changes how you speak it changes how you
communicate how you close a sale how you
get somebody to do something Everything
Changes the moment you're able to
profile a human being and understand who
they are a little bit deeper and if you
know the needs if I know that
your need is significance I
automatically know what one of your
fears and some of your biggest fears are
feeling insignificant feeling like you
could have made a difference but you
didn't make any difference like you
didn't leave any footprint in the world
like you didn't fulfill what you meant
what you wanted
to and any any need that I can identify
automatically reveals some fears and if
I understand fears I can also lead
behavior that way as
well I was thinking through the context
of being like a CEO or manager of
teams um this is I guess this is why
it's so important to know the different
types of people you have in your teams
and also I used to work on phones doing
Telly sales and you did yes for many
years I when I was 16 worked at Everest
in Plymouth which was uh windows and
doors and conservatories and artificial
grass and then when I went to Manchester
when I was a little bit older for
University before dropping out I um
worked at Swinton car insurance I worked
at a bunch of places I worked at Fusion
studi selling like uh photography
vouchers I did uh Facebook ad sales on
the phone back in the day wow lots of
lots of uh Telly sales experience and I
was just wondering because in those
moments you call someone out the blue or
they call you you asking for car
insurance and you don't have a big
window of time necessarily to figure out
what kind of person they are not at all
so how do you go about then you go back
to the Fate model so one of the sales
teams I recently
trained and I'm not on a confidentiality
agreement but one of the things when
they call people up out of the blue is
they pretend like their dog just knocked
a drink over on their computer right as
that person answers the phone and
they're like oh my God I'm so sorry hold
on one second and they're cleaning this
up and they're explaining like we just
got this new dog she knocked this coffee
over I'm really sorry person doesn't
even know who they are yet but they so
novel and interesting that they stay on
the phone 70% longer just because of the
spilled coffee and the person saying I'm
so sorry this is embarrassing making
this admission of I'm a little bit
embarrassed on the phone they stay on
the phone longer because novelty
captured that mamalian
Focus interesting and then if they're on
the phone a little bit longer you can
get to know them a little bit better and
understand what kind of person they are
and better adjust to yeah make sense and
then when you're saying I'm so sorry
this is really embarrassing the other
person most people are going to be like
no it's fine it's fine I don't even know
who you are yeah we haven't even got to
know each other
yet is there something that you see most
frequent that's deficient in sales
pitches when you're training sales
people is there like one particular
thing that's typically most
deficient that they're not doing there's
a few okay but slowness is a big one
Authority is lacking and confidence in
in what that person is
selling and going off of a script and
this is the biggest one any kind of
script automatically tells our brain so
like when's the last time you got you
get telemarketer calls to your phone
every once in a while once in a while
yeah yeah I do too and I'll answer it
and the moment that it sounds like
somebody going oh hi Mr Hughes this is
blank from blank company my brain knows
what a sales call sounds like and
instantly checks out of the conversation
instantaneously even if I didn't want to
do it my brain's already starting to
shut this guy out of my life because it
sounds like everything else I've ever
heard so since our brain is so good at
making apps I know because of just
knowing Neuroscience if I'm calling and
I sound like a salesperson or I sound
like something you've heard before
you're done you're going to get off the
phone as fast as possible if something
happens that makes you think whoa this
is different your brain is going to pay
more attention and I don't mean knocking
a Starbucks over across your laptop I
mean how can I make my sales calls not
sound like every other call that exists
I was victim of a phone call that was
clearly listening to your work because
the guy called me and said
hi this is a sales call and you can hang
up now if you're not interested but if
you are willing to hear me out I just
want 30 seconds and the fact that they
offered me the opportunity to hang up I
for some reason appreciated it and I
gave them the time and I remember I was
like really busy I was on my way to a
podcast recording and just the fact that
he' gone you can hang up now this just
gonna be honest this is a sales call
yeah he gave you
autonomy so I was like okay what are you
selling then he told me about some
social media soft or whatever but I just
thought it was really smart cuz you're
right within seconds I'm trying to
figure out if this is like all the
others yeah and we I guess we can do the
same in our emails in fact the co CEO
and COO of my media company that I hired
sent me an email in the first line of
the email they didn't even she's
listening now Cristiana and Georgie they
didn't even like introduce themselves
they
said um like straight to the point no
habituation filter
and it's interesting it's an interesting
open align because the word habituation
filter is something I talk about in my
book so they' kind of like tickled my
ego a little bit as well I think because
it says I've read your book yeah and
they went straight to the point and it
took cut me off guard and and got more
focused of course yeah they have the job
now they work here so and even the
subject line was like oh that was their
introduction email to you yeah that was
the first ever email yeah that's
brilliant cuz it's I don't think people
realize this unless you've been in a
situation where you're like like working
in recruitment looking at thousands of
emails but we when I used to really run
the recruitment inbox because I'm just
obsessed with the recruitment we have we
have 35,000 email emails in there and
I'm going through there at speed and I'm
looking
for what I would call exclusionary
factors and inclusionary factors what I
mean by that is factors to immediately
exclude this email yeah and factors to
immediately include this email within
three seconds to read later to read
later
read later or just it another and the
exclusionary is they're all just surface
things that you typically get from
people who typically do a certain thing
and that's I mean that's also why I
think about marketing newsletters if the
newsletter looks designed the studies
show the open rate the retention rate
the click-through rate is significantly
worse if it's a beautifully designed
email because people see it as a sales
email yeah the emails you get every day
that are important are not designed yeah
and so we we newsletter we
again the email newsletter provider was
saying oh you can use all these
templates but then we're like no no if
we use a template no one reads the thing
which is again counterintuitive but it's
the same psychology right it is like
I've increased our our open rate with
emails by not capitalizing the first
word of the subject line because it
looks like it's overly edited and we've
switched from here's a list of 13
uh ways that we might have failed in
2013 with this ad campaign or whatever
or this uh marketing campaign and I just
Chang the subject line to this
sucked and it just it did so much better
because it looks like something a friend
would send you it looks like something
you'd get from a relative or
something and that's that habituation
filter at play just trying
to phase out things that
are I like that not novel I think I read
it I read I was reading studies about
habituation and how we just habituate to
things and I was looking into um how
that happens in both what we see but
also in what we hear so the studies were
talking about if you say a word like
Father father father father father
father father father eventually it's
just becomes a sound in your head yeah
because your brain is taking away
cognitive resource it's no longer
thinking about the meaning and it's just
hearing the sound but then there's other
words that habituate slower like warning
warning warning warning warning warning
warning warning because those words are
like emotional and anyway um I think a
lot about it in the context of content
creation Mr Beast is the Great Master
of beating your habituation filter like
with how he starts his videos yeah
screaming in your face like yeah 500
people in that Circle million pounds but
I think he he defeats the habituation
filter for a certain type of
viewer because I I see any video that
looks like that I'm off within the first
second I'm done done because they all
look the same now yeah that's an
interesting observation so I think the
type of viewer is very important because
like during this video when people are
watching this conversation you're not
going to have 10 seconds of b-roll of
people walking in slow motion through an
airport there's not going to be you're
not overdesigning stuff and the people
who listen to this show are way
different than the people who are
watching Mr Beast drop a Ferrari onto a
a mattress m and blow it up they're very
very different so I think the
habituation filters change based on what
we consume and what we appreciate
interesting because we're all making
we're all doing sort of quick prejudices
about everything so shortcuts yeah yeah
I'm going to develop as many shortcuts
as I can to
save cognitive load brain
power at my company flight Studio which
is part of my bigger company flight
group we're constantly looking for ways
to build deeper connection with our
audiences whether that's a new show a
product or a project it's why I launched
the conversation cards I've relied on
Shopify before who's a sponsor of
today's podcast and I'll be using them
again for the next big launch which
we'll hear about soon and I use them
because of how easy it is to set up an
online store that reaches all of you no
matter where you are in the world with
Shopify the usual pain points of
launching products online Disappear
Completely no matter the size of your
business Shopify has everything you need
to make your business go to the next
level and better connect with your
customers all over the world to say
thank you to all of you for listening to
my show we're giving you a trial which
is just $1 a month you can sign up by
going to shopify.com
Bartlet that's shopify.com Bartlet or
find the link in the description
below what is the the most popular thing
people come to you and talk to you about
and ask you that we haven't talked about
today I think one of the most common in
there is
how can I change my discipline that's
the number one thing that I get from
people how do I level up discipline on
this Authority checklist
and getting to a point where they're
modifying their discipline changes their
confidence because I always talk about
discipline is kind of the gateway drug
to everything else in authority and it's
the gateway to composure for sure but
getting your discipline modified is one
of the the fastest ways to make
everything else change and how do I fix
my discipline if I'm an ill disciplined
person understanding what discipline is
is the most critical element and I
Define this differently than most people
so I Define discipline
as your ability to prioritize the needs
of your future
self ahead of your own present self and
that's it that's all the discipline is
I'm prioritizing the needs of future me
you're trying to think of
a I was think no I was thinking of two
scenarios the scenario one is I go home
tonight right because I go to sleep I
get to bed early and there's this other
thing I'm thinking about doing after
this which is going to the gym yeah and
I'm like I was just as you're saying
that I was thinking both help future me
yeah I was PR I was like which one is
disciplined I think they would both be
discipline okay
so the moment that we start
understanding that if I could just make
decisions that are prioritizing future
me then we go back to where am I getting
my dopamine from and I want past tense
me to be a source of dopamine for
present tense me because most of us look
back with regret I shouldn't have drank
that much I shouldn't have mouthed off
at the family reunion you know whatever
it is I shouldn't have
overslept if I can start looking
backwards with gratitude that's the
fastest way to make discipline dopamine
generating so the tricks are to start
small so like when I go to bed at night
I will pop open the little
curig uh coffee thing and stick the
thing in there put a cup under there
everything's like ready to go so when I
wake up in the morning I just go bam and
everything's ready I'll get my clothes
out everything kind of lined up ready to
put on for the next day so I'm I'm
lowering the threshold of how much
attention I'm spending so I'm going to
set my life up in everying single way
that I possibly can is if I were a
butler for future me so when I wake up
in the morning all this stuff set out my
laundries laid out my checklist for what
I need to do to the uh for the day all
the stuff I'm got to get on a plane is
all laid out by the back door I can grab
it and jump in the car everything that I
could possibly do to make my future self
go oh man that's awesome and Look
Backwards with gratitude I'm going to do
it I'll take a $100 biller maybe a few
hundred s every spring or summer and
I'll stick them in the a jacket pocket
that I'm not going to use until the
winter and I'll forget about it and in
the winter I'm I'm looking and now I
become a source of dopamine past tense
me is becoming a source of dopamine for
present me that forces me to look in the
future along with like printing that old
me photo and putting it all over the
house but everything that I can possibly
do to make myself look backwards with
gratitude is what I'm going to start
doing but you have to start small it's
like just going overboard is going to be
crazy and even writing a little Post-It
note to yourself and sticking it in a
jacket or a maybe a dress shoe that
you're not going to wear for a few
months it means so much to find that and
it's it's from you it's not from a loved
one you did it so you're looking
backwards with like wow that's amazing
so you're now getting in love and
sending gratitude backwards which
automatically means that what's going
forwards is concern and Care the moment
I'm always looking back with gratitude
the concern is always going forward in
the future and the concern for present
goes away and I'm gonna I'm going to
push that concern to the right out in
the future people struggle even with the
small things right like getting because
yeah it's funny because I watched a
video last night about a lady that went
to YouTube and started her like journey
of weight loss and whatever and she was
very I think she was 400 pounds or
something and she was trying to get down
and in the video you what some people
will know who I'm referring to over the
space of a year or two years she
actually just gains weight so she gets
to I think five 500 pound or something
and as I was watching it you're watching
someone who's saying I want to change my
life but then is coming on every day and
saying I've just gained three pounds
I've just gained another three pounds
and there's almost this this like
visible dissonance that you're observing
between this person saying they want to
change their life but clearly the
actions that they're then taking are
like are different to that and many
people can relate to that feeling of I
want to be this person I mean we're
coming up to like we for anyone that
doesn't know we're recording this in
December so New Year's resolutions
around the corner everyone's going to
say to themselves who they want to
become but it's easier said than done I
think what seven8 8% 9% of New Year's
resolutions will stick yeah so is is it
just a case of stuff starting small or
is there any other tricks to discipline
that you can offer it's starting small
and realizing that all of our lives are
about habits not goals but what are the
habits that make my goal a byproduct
everything is about byproducts in your
whole life whether you know it or not so
instead of setting goals set like the
byproduct what are the byproducts I want
to have for this year and then what are
the habits that make that up so what the
big mistake most people make is they see
somebody like you you go to the gym very
often you probably eat really clean um I
know you don't drink alcohol cuz I
brought you a flask and gave it to your
team but uh Bost they took it they did
yeah
so somebody who doesn't live a very
disciplined life would look at you and
say God I want to be like Stephen he's
got all this discipline going to the gym
but they don't understand that you going
to the gym isn't discipline it's a
habit so you're not like forcing
yourself to go do something you're doing
something that's a habit for you the
discipline only is necessary you only
need like a teaspoon of it at the very
beginning to get this habit started so
start micro habits first and then bigger
habits so the discipline is not
something that you should be seeing if
you're seeing someone eat healthy and go
to the gym do all the stuff you want to
do those are habits and that person
you're you're not seeing a discipline at
work right there you're seeing a habit
the discipline was just at the beginning
and I think if more people knew that
that you're just exercising a little
discipline at the very beginning and
then it's just that's just what you do
it's like somebody who sees someone
brushing their teeth every day like wow
that's so much discipline it's just what
we do it's a habit there's a interesting
part of this
um like habit equation you could say or
like discipline equation which
is the why
part which is like why does this matter
to you and is it important to get really
clear on why this thing matters to you
whether it's the gym or like because
when I I was playing around with this
discipline equation idea from my last
book and the kind of conclusion I landed
at was that to be disciplined you have
to understand the reason why something
matters to you you can say that in other
words yeah um plus
the psychological reinforcement you get
from the pursuit of the thing minus the
you could say
the psychological or perceived cost of
the pursuit of the thing so in the
context of brushing your teeth I think I
know why it matters right because if I
don't then I have to go to the dentist
my teeth fall out I look ugly whatever
it might be yeah the is it rewarding and
fun to do no not
really and minus the cost of the pursuit
it takes two minutes it's not that bad
but when that Nets out the Y is stronger
thankfully on net than the cost so the
behavior happens yeah but the key part
of this equation here is the Y part like
it's not the key part but it's the
central part is the Y part why does this
thing matter to you yeah and in how much
why like how big is the why yeah because
if if the why is I need enjoyment in the
present moment then no other why will be
bigger no disciplined why will ever be
larger the only why will be why am I
eating these Cheetos right now or why am
I drinking
20 beers every night because that's the
only why so I think once the why starts
edging its way into the future that's
that's the moment where you break the
discipline spiral and you get out of
that because your y's are extending into
time that hasn't happened yet does that
equation stack up for you saying this I
like it a lot because I I've been try
I've been saying it I wrote about this
in my book The whole idea is why plus
like we could say
reinforcement minus you could say cost
just to simplify it yeah but is there
anything missing from this
equation do you think is there anything
I said it to Simon cynic and he went
let's try it out and he talked to me
about taking his bin out in the morning
like taking the bin out for like the bin
men and it kind of holds up because he's
so the why is if I don't take the bin
out then I'm going to get fined and my
bin is going to overflow pretty strong
motivator the reinforcement there's no
reinforcement getting out of bed at 7:
a.m. to take your bin out it's not nice
yeah the cost is also significant
getting out of bed but the Y still so
it's y plus you could say like y plus
the psychological reinforcement from the
pursuit of doing it so DJing really fun
for me I would say there's you it would
be divided by the cost of inaction the
cost of inaction would would
either add to it but it's always going
to be your perception of the why mhm
your perception of the cost and your
perception of the cost of an action and
all of that is going to be about can I
use can I leverage my focus the mamalian
brain's Focus can I leverage authority
over myself in some way over that
mamalian part of my brain force myself
out of bed Force these habits to start
developing and then tribe are my friends
involved have I made a public agreement
about something and then the emotion
which I think would be the why yeah and
and like that's the emotional driver
that animal can understand
you visualizing yourself better like
looking with a six-pack or whatever it
is but printing it on a vision board
this is why I think vision boards are so
important not because we're manifesting
something out of the universe maybe it
is but we are definitely showing
something that a dog can understand it's
imagery and dog dog can understand
images so we're routinely exposing
ourselves to these vision boards on a
very very regular basis and if you
follow the brainwashing formula which is
focus emotion agitation and repetition
it spells
fear and that is the best way to
brainwash yourself to form these new
habits and goals so how can I get myself
to
focus how can I build the emotion which
is the why recurring emotion not just
one at the very beginning how can I
continue to make it emotional or maybe I
can make the cost of an action emotional
maybe I can buy the app that makes me
look fat or one of those things and then
agitation is if I'm waking up uh
habituation which you just talked about
if I'm waking up in the same house every
day that I've been fat in let's say I
wanted to lose weight or whatever the
same house every day that I've lived
xway in I'm seeing the same hallway same
rug same couch everything looks the same
my brain says oh I'm here I'm going to
follow that script because our brain
writes scripts for us to save us time so
a itation means I'm going to disrupt my
environment so much and so often that my
brain has no chance to default to an
older script so I have clients that
repaint their house they rearrange their
furniture they change up their wardrobe
a whole lot they get a completely new
haircut so they're not even looking at
the same person in the mirror anymore
they do everything you can to disrupt
that Rhythm it's exactly what we would
do with a a detainee if we were trying
to brainwash someone who is in an
intelligence uh interrogation so I'm
disrupting environment like crazy and
what will we do with a dog are we going
to let it do everything it's always done
we're going to change that environment
we're going to change the behavior
change the lease change the collar so
it's not not everything exactly the same
and then repetition repetition which is
just repeating the same thing over and
over so like if even just coming to the
vision
board uh the last client I had I had him
go to Best Buy and get a 70in TV
and then get one of those cheap tablets
those $300 $200 tablets and just duct
tape it to the back of the TV and put
his vision point vision board on that
thing it's like 900 slides of just
non-stop photos but it runs 24 hours a
day in his office even if he's not there
he walks in the morning it's on nonstop
repetition because him having to turn it
off at night means he's got another
point of discipline I've got to turn
that TV on start that little PowerPoint
thing um but that's nonstop and it's
just non-stop exposure so can I generate
Focus that's a lot of focus on on the
goals then there's emotion you're you're
seeing all of that agitation which is
disrupting my life patterns and
repetition which is just over and over
and over how can I reexpose you to the
same stimuli reexpose myself to the same
stimuli
interesting so I should keep a vision
board I I think always think with your
goals like how would I show these goals
to my
dog how would I show these goals to my
dog and how would I let my dog know
shit's going to change around here I'm
GNA move stuff around I'm G to make
everything different move his
bedh is there anything else that we
haven't covered yet in terms of your
work here that is important for us to
know I will give anybody listening one
big piece of advice that I've pass down
to my kids and maybe just make this a
final piece of advice is if you are
exposed to a product that can't tell you
the problem that they're solving you
need to be terrified absolutely
terrified so like if I look at door Dash
or Uber Eats they get food to me faster
I don't have to leave my house I don't
have to do anything I can continue
writing my book or doing something on my
computer and the food just shows up
they tell you the problem that they're
solving right look at Amazon they can
tell you all the problems they're
solving but you look at something like
apple Vision
Pro they can't tell
you you will never see it you see all
the problems that a Macbook solves this
this camera does all this does all these
things it helps you get this F done
faster and you look at Facebook
meta these AR goggles none of them will
ever ever tell you the problems that
they're trying to solve because it's
loneliness and people needing to
anesthetize themselves from being in
their own life and we are in a
loneliness epidemic right now in the
midst
of all this we've never been more
connected but we've never had more
loneliness than is in the world right
now so there's so many
products uh that are out there that are
that seem great but they can't
articulate what they're really solving
and it's usually loneliness boredom or a
need to anesthetize myself so I don't
have to think about my life I don't have
to be in my life
and that should be one thing if I could
just program into everyone's head be so
I did this to my kids just be so so
scared and so cautious when I see a
product or an app or anything that's not
openly advertised ing the problem that
they're solving I mean there's a lot of
entertainment apps right at the moment
for young kids and social networks fine
for boredom is boredom a problem it
might be but because I'm trying to
distinguish between like is Tik Tok
solving a problem for a young kid right
so that might be solving loneliness
instead of
boredom and I think Tik Tok does not
talk about solving any
problem it's like a casino isn't it for
the dopamine yeah it's so bad and they
use some they use a hypnosis technique
not just Tik Tok this is everybody uh
called
fractionation which is where you bring
somebody up and like so like you'll see
one of those videos of a grandpa holding
his grandbaby you know like that that
makes you almost cry have you ever cried
just watching like a 60-second Instagram
reel yeah I have too man and I feel
stupid I'm by myself yeah watching a
60-second video uh but like they'll pull
you down into that then they'll they'll
punch you back up like two videos later
and and you'll start to notice this two
videos later it'll be a riot someone
robbing a store fist fight a car going
way too fast flipping off the road an
airplane almost crouching so they get
you up and down and up and down and the
more I can do that this is proven that
that ramps up
suggestibility Dr Milton Erikson uh did
studies on this in the
1960s and that increases your level of
suggestibility like tenfold the more I
can get you up and down up and down and
what happens after you get like four
five cycles of up and down you get an
ad and it's so
reliable and I didn't realize it was
happening until my wife said why are you
buying off Instagram as like once a
week now
and it I was working on me so I was
buying stupid that was on Instagram
ads and then I finally set time limits
on those apps you set time limits on
those apps yes yes my wife has the
passcode to unlock the uh whatever it's
called screen time the iPhone screen
time but I'm a I'm a brainwashing
expert and I am personally
terrified of short form social media
like that and I'm not
immune and I'm one of the best in the
world and I am not immune to it and I
think that should be a stark warning for
a lot of
people what what's the cost though
what's the cost of the life in your view
of the living this kind of life where
you know we go home and we just like
burn our brains out with these social
media apps and Fry our dopamine
receptors is there like a
cost yeah I think the cost is increased
loneliness and the these apps any app
that sells ads has two main goals number
one uh and all advertising shares these
two main goals number one make you
compare yourself to other people in
unhealthy ways number two make you think
I am not enough and we see that
everywhere I'm not enough I'm comparing
myself to other people and it gets us
into an US versus them then it traps you
into into a corner of confirmation bias
whatever you think I'm going to show you
this group of 150 people that agree with
you no matter how stupid how radical how
absolutely bizarre your ideas are let me
show you all of these people and then
you start thinking the whole world's
like that so really
quickly what happens when we
conglomerate people together like I'm
I've only been in New York once in my
life but we're in New York right now
looking at my hotel I like struggling to
find a piece of nature like I think I
have more trees on my property than
they're in the whole uh City here so on
the whole when you squeeze people
together have you heard of the bystander
effect uh I have heard of it but please
so they there is a very good experiment
that was led by Dr Phillips and Bardo
that they did at uh Liverpool Street
Station in London in London yeah okay so
right at Liverpool Street there's this
there's a video on YouTube
um and it's fair use if you want to
Overlay like an image of what this looks
like but at Liverpool Street station
there's three or four steps to get up to
the main so from the street there's a
curb and then there's three or four
steps they had this woman laid out on
the ground wearing like a normal skirt
and top and I think 395 people either
walked by her or stepped over
her and then they did it with a guy then
they did it with a guy he's holding a
beer and he's asking for help and they
they made changed all these variables
but it's happened in New York City
before there's a woman named Kitty
genovas in the 60s I think just two
blocks from here who was stabbed to
death in front of like 55 Witnesses
don't quote me on that number and no one
called the police until much much later
mostly because everyone thought somebody
else would act but if I describe to
you saying I watched a person get
stabbed and three people just watched
and they watched it happen would you say
that that's psychopathy that's a
psychopath so these large cities and
stuff and the apps that are messing with
the social part of our brain that makes
us think the tribe is way bigger than
our brains are made to handle causes
this almost Psychopathic
Behavior which the bystander effect has
been
proven hundreds of times as as an
experiment is that because if I'm
logging on to social media I'm becoming
desensitized to this kind of thing but
also if if you live in London you get
quite accustomed to seeing someone that
is homeless and so in that case of
seeing someone rolling on the Floy
Liverpool Street Station you might have
seen it before and it might have just
been someone who was homeless or
struggling with something yeah some kind
of addiction or something yeah so you
you you've become somewhat desensitized
to it is that so it you you are getting
desensitized to it but your brain is
made to hold small tribes of a couple
hundred people and the moment that tribe
expands into something your brain can't
imagine you are no longer relying on
reputation from anyone you don't care
what other people are thinking about
you and the moment that stops your brain
says I don't have the capacity to worry
about everyone that I see so empathy
disappears like you walk down these
streets here in New York their empathy
is zero for you no matter what's
happening you walk through a country
town it's like 1,500 people I the
population of the town I live in is
2,200 and if you get cut on the arm or
like you stumbled four cars will stop
people get out of their cars to figure
out what's going on because our brains
can handle smaller tribes the moment we
get flooded with all of these things all
of these people that we can't possibly
care about everybody empathy
disappears the second aspect of this is
if we're surrounded by environments that
our ancestors would be absolutely scared
of and confused by we we start
developing problems in our brain
depression loneliness suicide through
the roof in large cities every time
there's no exception and I think the
same thing happens when we put stuff our
cells our ancestors cells don't
recognize uh you had the glucose Queen
on here recently talking about some of
this we're putting unnatural stuff into
our bodies you had a toxicologist on
here I think talking about this too that
goes into our bodies Our Ancestors don't
know what that is and our bodies can't
process it it turns into disease it
turns into mental disease when our
bodies can't process everything that's
going on around us so I in my theory and
this is just my theory the further we're
separated from nature we find disease
mental and physical
amen we have a closing tredition on this
podcast where the last guest leaves a
question for the next guest not knowing
who they're going to be leaving it for
the question left for you is how can we
consistently feel and appreciate the
blessings in our lives and this is
interesting because you talked about
gratitude earlier on yeah I think
if mindfulness has become a Trope now
it's just kind of become overused on on
the internet and it's one of the I think
it's a super power just learning present
tense mindfulness of just being in this
moment and I think if you one of the
fastest ways to get good at just
enjoying the moment is to be so self
forgiving that it's almost delusional
that's the best advice that I could give
somebody be delusionally self-forgiving
about
everything what does that mean in
reality give me an example um most
people look back with regret and shame I
shouldn't have done that or I should
have done that I can't believe I
embarrassed myself I can't believe I you
know did that thing in front of those
people get so forgiving of everything
that you've ever done of yourself that
it is like delusional to the point where
it's just crazy and you're thinking I
shouldn't forgive myself for that you
get to a point where everything is fine
and it's just
hilarious if you get to that point your
ability to stay in the present and not
stuck in the past will tin X overnight
just the ability to be delusionally self
forgiving how does that keep you out of
thinking about the future though because
thinking about the future is
great especially once we follow that
discipline practice and we're putting
concern forward and gratitude
backwards you wrote a book called phrase
seven which which is I hear is being
turned into a TV series yeah which
you're going to feature in as a
bartender as a bartender and this is
being released next year for 25 seconds
all right okay better than nothing and
this is being released next year we're
hopeful yeah what's your what is the
book about phas s it is a fictional book
about mind control hypnosis
brainwashing and how those things are
being used on our population but also
about how you can recognize it and even
how you can use some of those techniques
in your everyday life but it's kind of
like a mix
between
24 and Suits okay yeah people know suits
and if I if I want to learn more about
your work and I want to get I want to go
further into everything that you do
where's the best place for me to go just
our homepage which is NCI which is our
neurocognitive intelligence NCI do
University NCI do University yeah and
right at the very bottom of that page
I'll put a link that says CEO that has
anything that I talked about here as
well that people can download and this
book here is that available on the
website the paperback version of that is
yes okay the paperback version the same
but it's the same stuff right yes
exactly cool Chase thank you it's so
unbelievably fascinating I I get the
impression that I could talk to you
probably
for 20 hours maybe I feel like this
conversation could have been 20 hours
long because I feel like we're just
scratching the surface but because I
guess at the end of the day everything
is about humans it is you know every
every goal dream problem I have in my
life it could actually be just distilled
down to some kind of human challenge
with my girlfriend with you know the
businesses I run Etc even with like
being a host of a podcast it's all human
beings so that's why I'm so hungry to
learn more because it's clearly like the
singular skill that's going to unlock
all of the things that I care about and
that's why as well like when you talk
about some of these studies the milgrim
study and a bunch of them in school I
was obsessed with these things I still
remember the studies that like the mgrm
study that they just changed my life and
my thinking in so many ways and as I
grew up and I became you know I did like
uh call center stuff and then like
business leadership in our podcast it's
all there it's all been human it's all
there every step of the way it's been
about the same things even you know
running businesses now the mgrm study or
the when I was in the call center the
milgrim study was still pertinent or as
a podcast host the milgrim study is
still pertinent because it's once again
just dealing with humans and that's what
you're helping people to unlock so thank
you for doing what you do absolutely um
and for the many you know you've got a
lot of Raving fans online I thank you on
behalf of all of them as well and if
anyone wants to go check out the YouTube
channel which is really fascinating
because I've watched you many many many
many times breaking down moments in
society and culture and looking at those
moments through the lens of Behavioral
um factors and body language and things
like that to help you interpret what was
going on in that moment it's incredibly
Illuminating and it's incredibly it's
entertainment at the end of the day it's
fantastic thank you so much Chase thanks
Sten when it comes to food I trust my
gut and I trust Zoe a business I'm an
investor in and today's sponsor of this
podcast all the nutritionists I've
spoken to have highlighted just how
misleading information is out there when
it comes to food take healthy Halos the
claims you see on packaging that say
things like low sugar and nothing
artificial are often a sign of foods to
avoid have you ever noticed a health
claim on fresh fruit you probably get my
point understandably there's loads of
distrust out there who should you turn
to for accurate information I use Zoe
which is backed by one of the world's
largest microbiome databases and most
scientifically Advanced atome gut health
tests Zoe gives you proven science
whenever you need it as a Zoe member
you'll get an atome test kit and
personalized nutrition program to help
you make smarter food choices that
support your gut to sign up visit
zoe.com and use my code Steven 10 for
10% off your membership that's zoe.com
code
step10 trust your gut trust s
[Music]